Welcome back. One key method
that you will use to reduce
the computational cost
of finding k-nearest neighbors in
high-dimensional spaces is
locality-sensitive hashing.
In this video, I
will teach you what
hashes are and where
they are used.
To start thinking about
locality-sensitive hashing,
let's first assume
that you're using
word vectors with
just two dimensions.
I'll depict each vector as
a circle instead of arrows.
So let's say you want to
find a way to know that
these blue dots are somehow
close to each other,
and that these gray dots are
also related to each other.
First, divide the space
using these dashed lines,
which I'll call planes.
I'll explain why I called
them planes in a bit.
Notice how the blue
plane slices up
the space into vectors that
are above it or below it.
The blue vectors all happen to
be on the same side
of the blue plane.
Similarly, the gray vectors
happen to be above
the gray plane.
It looks like the planes
can help us bucket
the vectors into subsets
based on their location.
This is exactly what you want.
A hashing function
that is sensitive to
the location of the items
that it's assigning into buckets.
You're working your way towards
locality-sensitive hashing.
Now, let's see why I'm calling
these dashed lines planes.
A plane would be
this magenta line into
two-dimensional space,
and it actually represents
all the possible vectors
that would be sitting
on that plane.
In other words, they would
be parallel to the plane,
such as this blue vector
or this orange vector.
You can define a plane
with a single vector.
This magenta vector is
perpendicular to the plane,
and it's called the normal
vector to that plane.
The normal vector
is perpendicular
to any vectors that
lie on the plane.
It might help to think about
this in three dimensions.
Find a sheet of paper
and find a pencil.
Place the paper on the table
and draw some vectors on it,
then hold the pencil
vertically over the paper.
Any vectors on the paper are
perpendicular to the pencil.
Let's go back to two dimensions.
You are able to see visually when
the vector is on one side
of the plane or the other,
but how do you do
this mathematically?
Here are three sample vectors
in blue, orange, and green.
The normal vector to
the plane is labeled
P. Let's focus on vector 1.
What if you take the dot
product of P with vector one?
You get three. I'll explain
in a bit why you're doing this.
Now, let's look at the vector 2.
If you take the dot
product of P with
vector 2, you get zero.
Finally, let's look at vector 3.
If you take the dot product
of P with vector 3,
you get negative three.
So the dot products are 3,
0, and negative 3.
Do you notice something
about the signs and how
they're related to their position
relative to the red plane?
When the dot product is positive,
the vector is on one
side of the plane.
If the dot product is negative,
the vector is on the
opposite side of the plane.
If the dot product is zero,
the vector is on the plane.
So what's the dot product doing?
To visualize the dot product,
imagine one of the
vectors such as P,
as if it's the
surface of the Earth.
Gravity pulls all objects
straight down towards the
surface of the Earth.
Next, pretend you're standing at
the end of the vector, V1.
You tie a string to a rock and
let gravity pull the
rock to the surface of
vector P. The string is
perpendicular to vector P. Now,
if you draw a vector that's in
the same direction of P
but ends up at the rock,
you'll have what's
called the projection of
vector V1 onto vector P.
The magnitude or length
of that vector is equal
to the dot product of
V1 and P. Furthermore,
if you had this
other green vector
and projected it onto vector P,
the projected vector
would be pointing in
the parallel but
opposite direction of
P. The dot product would
be a negative number.
This means that the sign of
the dot product indicates
the direction of the projection
with respect to the
purple normal vector.
So whether the dot product
is positive or
negative can tell you
whether the vector V1 or V2 are
on one side of the
plane or the other.
Let's use code to check
which side of the plane
the vector is on.
The function side of plane
takes in the normal vector P,
and the vector v. Use numpy
dot to take the dot products.
Use numpy.sign to get a
plus one if the dot
product is positive,
minus one if the dot
product is negative,
or zero if the dot
product is zero.
I'm using numpy.asscalar.
Notice the pronunciation
of that function.
If a vector can be represented
as a single scalar,
this function retrieves
that scalar, and that's it.
Please try it out for yourself.